(With respect to Summary Judgment)
[1]
: This is a motion by the defendants for summary judgment seeking determination of the plaintiff's action as the only genuine issue for trial is a question of law.
[2]
This question of law requires the interpretation of ss. 12(1) and 12(3)(a) of the
Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act
, S.C. 2000, c. 17 (the "
"), which reads as follows:
"12(1) Every person or entity referred to in subsection (3) shall report to an officer, in accordance with the regulations, the importation or exportation of currency or monetary instruments of a value equal to or greater than the prescribed amount.
. . . . .
"(3) Currency or monetary instruments shall be reported under subsection (1)
(a) in the case of currency or monetary instruments in the actual possession of a person arriving in or departing from Canada, or that form part of their baggage if they and their baggage are being carried on board the same conveyance, by that person or, in prescribed circumstances, by the person in charge of the conveyance;"
To be determined in this case is whether the obligation to report the importation of currency with a value equal to or greater than Cdn. $10,000 arises when an individual does not have the subjective intention to import this currency.
Facts
[3]
On March 13, 2004, the plaintiff Van Phat Hoang was driving across Canada. He was lost and took a wrong turn towards the United States border at Pigeon River, Ontario. The plaintiff's vehicle turned around after crossing into United States territory, but before going through the U.S. border checkpoint.
[4]
Upon arriving at the Canadian border checkpoint, the plaintiff was questioned by Canadian Customs Officers. When asked whether he was in possession of money or monetary instruments equal to or greater than Cdn. $10,000, the plaintiff responded in the negative. A subsequent search of the plaintiff's vehicle revealed Cdn. $70,000 in cash, which was packaged in plastic bags and hidden in the tailgate liner of the pick-up truck.
[5]
Failing to report the import of money or monetary instruments equal to or greater than Cdn. $10,000 to Customs Officers is an offence under s. 12 of the
. Pursuant to s. 18 of the
, the cash was seized by the Customs Officers as forfeit.
[6]
The plaintiff applied to the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness for the return of the funds under s. 25 of the
. Section 25 reads:
"25. A person from whom currency or monetary instruments were seized under section 18, or the lawful owner of the currency or monetary instruments, may within 90 days after the date of the seizure request a decision of the Minister as to whether subsection 12(1) was contravened, by giving notice in writing to the officer who seized the currency or monetary instruments or to an officer at the customs office closest to the place where the seizure took place."
The Minister's Decision under Appeal
[7]
By decision dated October 5, 2004, the Minister informed the plaintiff that the $70,000 would not be returned to him and that the forfeiture was deemed to be justified by the
"[i]n light of the amount of money found, the manner of its transportation and packaging, as well as the lack of documentary evidence establishing its legitimate/legal origin".
[8]
The plaintiff appealed the Minister's decision under s. 30 of the
, which provides for an appeal of the Minister's decision under s. 25 by way of an action in the Federal Court.
The relevant statutes are:
1. the
Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act
, S.C. 2000, c. 17; and
2. the
Customs Act
The relevant sections are set out in Appendix "A" [omitted].
[10]
Pursuant to s. 2(1) of the
Cross-border Currency and Monetary Instruments Reporting Regulations
, SOR/2002-412 (the "
Regulations
"), the prescribed amount referred to in s. 12(1) is Cdn. $10,000. See Appendix "A" for this section of the
Regulations
.
The Plaintiff's Argument
[11]
The plaintiff states that he was not aware that he had left Canada, and was not told by Canada Customs officers that he had done so. He argues that he did not intend to cross the border and leave Canada, thus he neither exported nor imported the money in question.
[12]
The plaintiff urges this Court to view s. 12 within the context and purpose of the
, which is to combat international money laundering. It is submitted that the aim of the
is not to detain persons who cross the border accidentally without the intention of leaving Canada. An element of intention is said to be necessary for there to be exportation or importation of goods.
[13]
The plaintiff relies upon the following definitions in
Black's Law Dictionary
, 7th Ed. (St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co.: 1999), which read:
A product brought into a country from a foreign country where it originated.
importation. The bringing of goods in a country from another country."
The plaintiff submits that he did not import the cash because the cash was not brought into Canada "from a foreign country where it originated". The cash never entered the U.S., and never came to Canada from the U.S.
The Defendants' Argument
[14]
The defendants submit that an individual's intention to cross the border is not relevant. The obligation to report under s. 12 arises whenever a person leaves or enters Canada with currency or monetary instruments in excess of Cdn. $10,000, regardless of their intention. This interpretation of s. 12 is said to be in accord with the ordinary meanings of the words "exportation" and "importation" and with the context and the purpose of the
The defendants rely on the modern approach to statutory interpretation, as set out in
Dreidger on the Construction of Statutes
(2nd Ed. 1983), and endorsed by the Supreme Court of Canada in
"Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament."
[16]
The ordinary meanings of exportation and importation are as follows, according to
Black's Law Dictionary
: exportation is "the act of sending or carrying goods from one country to another", and importation is "the bringing of goods into a country from another country". The Supreme Court of Canada's construction of the word "import" (in the context of a drug case
<FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,) was that to import into Canada means to bring a good from anywhere outside Canada to anywhere inside Canada. This necessarily includes the act of crossing the border.
[17]
When interpreting federal statutes, the defendants submit that the Court must bear in mind s. 12 of the
Interpretation Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, which says that every enactment is to be given large and liberal construction and interpretation as best ensures the attainment of its objectives.
[18]
The purpose of the
is to track suspicious financial transactions and the cross-border movement of large amounts of currency. It does not restrict the amount of money that may be brought into or taken out of Canada or render such a practice illegal. It simply creates a mandatory reporting obligation for the import or export of sums equal to or greater than the designated amount, which currently is Cdn. $10,000.
[19]
If an individual imports or exports currency or monetary instruments in excess of this amount, there is no consequence if the act is reported and the individual is able to account for the funds. If an individual fails to make such a report, a Customs Officer may seize the money as forfeit pursuant to s. 18 of the
. The seized funds may be returned to their owner upon payment of a penalty, unless there are reasonable grounds to believe that the money is proceeds of crime, whereupon the funds will be held as forfeit by the Crown.
[20]
In the submission of the defendants, this reporting requirement is mandatory, automatic, and not dependent upon an individual's intention. Including an intention requirement would result in ineffective detection of cross-border movements of money. Parliament does not intend such a consequence; it is unreasonable to interpret a statute in a way which defeats its purpose.
[21]
Further guidance is said to be obtained from the interpretation of the reporting requirement under the
Customs Act
, R.S. 1985, c. 1, under which an importer must account for the quantity and value of goods and pay the associated duties and taxes. Failure to meet this obligation results in a penalty, no matter the source of the error or the intention of the importer. The lack of intent to mislead or the presence of an inadvertent error do not affect the validity of a seizure, see
<FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). It is submitted that the reporting obligation under the
is analogous, and the intention of the individual is irrelevant. Failing to report in accordance with the
is said to be a contravention of the
, regardless of whether the individual had the intention to export or import the currency or monetary instrument.
The Test for Granting Summary Judgment
[22]
The issue of summary judgment is governed by Rules 213 to 219 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106. Of particular import in this case is Rule 216, which provides in part:
"216(1) Where on a motion for summary judgment the Court is satisfied that there is no genuine issue for trial with respect to a claim or defence, the Court shall grant summary judgment accordingly.
"(2) Where on a motion for summary judgment the Court is satisfied that the only genuine issue is
. . . . .
(b) a question of law, the Court may determine the question and grant summary judgment accordingly.
"(3) Where on a motion for summary judgment the Court decides that there is a genuine issue with respect to a claim or defence, the Court may nevertheless grant summary judgment in favour of any party, either on an issue or generally, if the Court is able on the whole of the evidence to find the facts necessary to decide the questions of fact and law. [...]"
This Court may grant summary judgment if the only genuine issue for trial is a question of law which is to be decided upon agreed upon evidence. The Federal Court of Appeal has limited the circumstances in which a judge may grant summary judgment, for fear of rendering decisions which are unfair on the evidence, see
<FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Because this case has no contested facts and turns solely on a question of law, the caution in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> does not apply.
The facts of this case are not in dispute. The sole issue is a question of law. The plaintiff agrees. Pursuant to sub-rule 216(1) of the
Federal Courts Rules
, I have determined that the only genuine issue for trial is a question of law, i.e. the interpretation of s. 12 of the
The word "importation" is defined neither in the
, nor in the
Regulations
. This means that Parliament intended for the ordinary meaning of this word to apply.
[26]
The meaning of the phrase "the importation ... of currency ..." in s. 12(1) of the
is a question of law to be determined by the Court with the aid of dictionaries.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), per Jackett, C.J., at paragraph 19:
"¶ 19 In legal theory, as I understand the law, the general rule is that a word in a document such as a statute or order in council having the effect of law is to be given its ordinary or popular meaning according to the context [See Note 1 below] and that meaning is a question of law to be determined by the Court with the aid of dictionaries and other legitimate aids of construction. ..."
[27]
The plaintiff submits that the word "importation" means the intended bringing into Canada of the cash from another country. With respect, the Court does not agree. In determining the grammatical and ordinary sense of the word "importation" used by Canadians, the Court has referred to the definition provided in the
Canadian Oxford Dictionary
, 2nd Ed. (Toronto Ontario: Oxford University Press, 2004). The
Canadian Oxford Dictionary
defines the verb "import" as:
"to bring in (especially foreign goods or services) to a country."
(The
Canadian Oxford Dictionary
does not provide a definition for "importation".)
Black's Law Dictionary
defines "importation" as:
"the bringing of goods into a country from another country."
The definitions speak of the concept of bringing goods into a country. This is a physical act. I do not agree with the plaintiff that these meanings require an intention on behalf of the actor.
[28]
The reporting requirement under s. 12 of the
is analogous to the duty to report imported goods under s. 12 of the
Customs Act
. The jurisprudence under s. 12 of the
Customs Act
has held that this
is contravened when an incorrect declaration is made on behalf of the importer even if that error was made with a lack of intent to mislead customs. An inadvertent error in reporting imported goods does not affect the validity of a seizure of those goods.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at page 76.
[29]
A purposive analysis further supports the defendants' position in this matter. The plaintiff states that the purpose of the
is to combat international money laundering. This is not the only purpose. As set out in s. 3, the
requires the reporting of the importation of currency and monetary instruments. To achieve this purpose, the tracking system is obligatory.
[30]
I conclude that s. 12 of the
is not dependent upon an individual's intention to import. The plaintiff has no other defence for his failure to report the currency. Accordingly, I must allow the motion for summary judgment.
The plaintiff has not challenged in this appeal whether the Minister had reasonable grounds to suspect that the seized currency are proceeds of crime. This is also part of the Minister's decision.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 282 F.T.R. 121; 2005 FC 1437, this Court held that that part of the decision under this
must be challenged by way of judicial review under s. 18.1 of the
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, and cannot be challenged by way of this action under s. 30 of the
. The Court held that this dichotomy in the appeal procedure is "both awkward and inconvenient", and "unfair", see paragraph 39 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra.
[32]
I wish to state in obiter that the appeal to the Federal Court under s. 30(1) of the
is not so clear that I would conclude that Parliament intended two appeals to the Federal Court with respect to the same decision, or that Parliament would have provided a party with the right to appeal the decision by way of an action in the Federal Court, yet limited that appeal to only one part of the decision.
[33]
For example, in the case at bar, the decision of the Minister was under s. 27 of the
, namely that there had been a contravention of s. 12, and under s. 29, namely that the seized currency in the amount of $70,000 is held as forfeit. The appeal right under s. 30 is written in reasonably broad language. It provides that the person who requested a decision of the Minister under s. 25 may appeal "the decision" by way of an action to the Federal Court. While the request for the decision is as to whether s. 12(1) of the
was contravened, the decision which may be appealed is made under ss. 27, 28 and 29 of the
, with the right of an appeal of that decision under s. 30. Applying a modern approach to statutory construction, my interpretation meets the scheme of the
, the object of the
and the intention of Parliament. A narrow interpretation would be, as the Court said in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, "awkward", "inconvenient" and "unfair". I cannot conclude that Parliament would have intended such a result, and I do not think the language of s. 30 is so clear as to dictate such a result.
THIS COURT ORDERS THAT:
This motion by the defendants for summary judgment is allowed so that this action is dismissed with costs.
Motion granted.
1. Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act, S.C. 2000, c. 17
"Currency and monetary instruments
"12(1) Every person or entity referred to in subsection (3) shall report to an officer, in accordance with the regulations, the importation or exportation of currency or monetary instruments of a value equal to or greater than the prescribed amount.
"(2) A person or entity is not required to make a report under subsection (1) in respect of an activity if the prescribed conditions are met in respect of the person, entity or activity, and if the person or entity satisfies an officer that those conditions have been met.
Who must report
"(3) Currency or monetary instruments shall be reported under subsection (1)
(a) in the case of currency or monetary instruments in the actual possession of a person arriving in or departing from Canada, or that form part of their baggage if they and their baggage are being carried on board the same conveyance, by that person or, in prescribed circumstances, by the person in charge of the conveyance;
(b) in the case of currency or monetary instruments imported into Canada by courier or as mail, by the exporter of the currency or monetary instruments or, on receiving notice under subsection 14(2), by the importer;
(c) in the case of currency or monetary instruments exported from Canada by courier or as mail, by the exporter of the currency or monetary instruments;
(d) in the case of currency or monetary instruments, other than those referred to in paragraph (a) or imported or exported as mail, that are on board a conveyance arriving in or departing from Canada, by the person in charge of the conveyance; and
(e) in any other case, by the person on whose behalf the currency or monetary instruments are imported or exported.
Duty to answer and comply with the request of an officer
"(4) If a report is made in respect of currency or monetary instruments, the person arriving in or departing from Canada with the currency or monetary instruments shall
(a) answer truthfully any questions that the officer asks with respect to the information required to be contained in the report; and
(b) on request of an officer, present the currency or monetary instruments that they are carrying or transporting, unload any conveyance or part of a conveyance or baggage and open or unpack any package or container that the officer wishes to examine.
Sending reports to Centre
"(5) Officers shall send the reports they receive under subsection (1) to the Centre.
"18(1) If an officer believes on reasonable grounds that subsection 12(1) has been contravened, the officer may seize as forfeit the currency or monetary instruments.
Return of seized currency or monetary instruments
"(2) The officer shall, on payment of a penalty in the prescribed amount, return the seized currency or monetary instruments to the individual from whom they were seized or to the lawful owner unless the officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that the currency or monetary instruments are proceeds of crime within the meaning of subsection 462.3(1) of the
or funds for use in the financing of terrorist activities.
Notice of seizure
"(3) An officer who seizes currency or monetary instruments under subsection (1) shall
(a) if they were not imported or exported as mail, give the person from whom they were seized written notice of the seizure and of the right to review and appeal set out in sections 25 and 30;
(b) if they were imported or exported as mail and the address of the exporter is known, give the exporter written notice of the seizure and of the right to review and appeal set out in sections 25 and 30; and
(c) take the measures that are reasonable in the circumstances to give notice of the seizure to any person whom the officer believes on reasonable grounds is entitled to make an application under section 32 in respect of the currency or monetary instruments.
Service of notice
"(4) The service of a notice under paragraph (3)(b) is sufficient if it is sent by registered mail addressed to the exporter.
"25. A person from whom currency or monetary instruments were seized under section 18, or the lawful owner of the currency or monetary instruments, may within 90 days after the date of the seizure request a decision of the Minister as to whether subsection 12(1) was contravened, by giving notice in writing to the officer who seized the currency or monetary instruments or to an officer at the customs office closest to the place where the seizure took place.
Notice of Commissioner
"26(1) If a decision of the Minister is requested under section 25, the Commissioner shall without delay serve on the person who requested it written notice of the circumstances of the seizure in respect of which the decision is requested.
"(2) The person on whom a notice is served under subsection (1) may, within 30 days after the notice is served, furnish any evidence in the matter that they desire to furnish.
Decision of the Minister
"27(1) Within 90 days after the expiry of the period referred to in subsection 26(2), the Minister shall decide whether subsection 12(1) was contravened.
Deferral of decision
"(2) If charges are laid with respect to a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence in respect of the currency or monetary instruments seized, the Minister may defer making a decision but shall make it in any case no later than 30 days after the conclusion of all court proceedings in respect of those charges.
Notice of decision
"(3) The Minister shall, without delay after making a decision, serve on the person who requested it a written notice of the decision together with the reasons for it.
If there is no contravention
"28. If the Minister decides that subsection 12(1) was not contravened, the Minister of Public Works and Government Services shall, on being informed of the Minister's decision, return the penalty that was paid, or the currency or monetary instruments or an amount of money equal to their value at the time of the seizure, as the case may be.
If there is a contravention
"29(1) If the Minister decides that subsection 12(1) was contravened, the Minister shall, subject to the terms and conditions that the Minister may determine,
(a) decide that the currency or monetary instruments or, subject to subsection (2), an amount of money equal to their value on the day the Minister of Public Works and Government Services is informed of the decision, be returned, on payment of a penalty in the prescribed amount or without penalty;
(b) decide that any penalty or portion of any penalty that was paid under subsection 18(2) be remitted; or
(c) subject to any order made under section 33 or 34, confirm that the currency or monetary instruments are forfeited to Her Majesty in right of Canada.
The Minister of Public Works and Government Services shall give effect to a decision of the Minister under paragraph (a) or (b) on being informed of it.
"(2) The total amount paid under paragraph (1)(a) shall, if the currency or monetary instruments were sold or otherwise disposed of under the Seized Property Management Act, not exceed the proceeds of the sale or disposition, if any, less any costs incurred by Her Majesty in respect of the currency or monetary instruments.
Appeal to Federal Court
"30(1) A person who requests a decision of the Minister under section 25 may, within 90 days after being notified of the decision, appeal the decision by way of an action in the Federal Court in which the person is the plaintiff and the Minister is the defendant.
Ordinary action
"(2) The Federal Courts Act and the rules made under that Act that apply to ordinary actions apply to actions instituted under subsection (1) except as varied by special rules made in respect of such actions.
"(3) The Minister of Public Works and Government Services shall give effect to the decision of the Court on being informed of it.
"(4) If the currency or monetary instruments were sold or otherwise disposed of under the Seized Property Management Act, the total amount that can be paid under subsection (3) shall not exceed the proceeds of the sale or disposition, if any, less any costs incurred by Her Majesty in respect of the currency or monetary instruments."
Action ordinaire
2. Customs Act, R.S., 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.).
"12(1) Subject to this section, all goods that are imported shall, except in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be reported at the nearest customs office designated for that purpose that is open for business."
3. Cross-border Currency and Monetary Instruments Reporting Regulations, SOR/2002-412
"2(1) For the purposes of reporting the importation or exportation of currency or monetary instruments of a certain value under subsection 12(1) of the Act, the prescribed amount is $10,000.
"(2) The prescribed amount is in Canadian dollars or its equivalent in a foreign currency, based on
(a) the official conversion rate of the Bank of Canada as published in the Bank of Canada's Daily Memorandum of Exchange Rates that is in effect at the time of importation or exportation; or
(b) if no official conversion rate is set out in that publication for that currency, the conversion rate that the person or entity would use for that currency in the normal course of business at the time of the importation or exportation."
[End of document]