Federal Court
Marc-Antoine Gagné, in person, for the applicant;
Nicholas R. Banks, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
William F. Pentney, Deputy General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2013] F.T.R. TBEd. AP.004.
[1]
[Translation]: Before me is a motion to appeal, pursuant to Rule 51 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106 (the Rules), from an order made December 21, 2012, by Richard Morneau, Prothonotary, striking the applicant's statement without possibility of amendment, and dismissing the applicant's action.
[2]
The appeal was heard together with the appeal against the order made by Mr. Morneau in docket T-1935-12 (
<FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) and it will have the same outcome.
Background
[3]
The applicant is a former inmate who served a two-year prison sentence. On October 17, 2012, he brought an action against the respondent for damages in the amount of $100,000. The statement consists of 4 paragraphs, which state:
[translation]
i. The relief sought is for: one hundred thousand dollars, and this amount can be lowered.
ii. The applicant was an inmate at the C.S.C. During his incarceration he had very limited access to computers, and no Internet access.
iii. We claim that this is a major violation of a constitutional right (section 2 of the Charter)
iv. We therefore ask for one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).
[4]
The respondent submitted a motion to strike the statement and to dismiss the applicant's action pursuant to Rule 221 of the Rules, stating that the statement did not contain any statement of facts and did not indicate any cause of action.
[5]
The respondent filled her motion pursuant to Rule 369 of the Rules, asking that the Court process the motion based on written representations.
[6]
The applicant requested that the motion be heard at a hearing. Mr. Morneau felt that he could decide on the motion based on the parties' written arguments and it was not necessary to hold a hearing.
Mr. Morneau's order can essentially be summarized by the following extract:
[translation]
after reading the above-noted files and the applicant's very brief statement of claim, the Court clearly comes to the same findings as the respondent, namely that it is clear this statement of claim shows no valid cause of action within the meaning of paragraph 221(1)(a) of the Rules, for the reasons raised by the respondent in her written arguments, enclosed with the motion record submitted December 6, 2012, and more specifically for the summary of the situation the respondent presents at paragraphs 14 to 19 of her arguments;
...
as a result, it is clear and evident that the applicant's statement of action raises no valid cause of action within the meaning of paragraph 221(1)(
) of the rules of this Court and it should therefore be dismissed, with no possibility of amendment considering, as demonstrated in an order issued the same day in another case related to the present case and involving the applicant, that even when he elaborates, the applicant cannot state and limit himself to the material, specific and relevant facts
;
This motion raises a single true question: did Mr. Morneau err in his order, justifying the intervention of the Court?
Standard of review
[9]
For the same reasons issued at paragraphs 9 to 11 of the judgment rendered in T-1935-12 (the judgment is attached to the present judgment to simplify reference), that I must exercise my discretionary power and dispose of the motion to strike
The parties' claims
[10]
The applicant claims Mr. Morneau did not give him the opportunity to present his defence at a hearing. He also claims that his statement is sufficient and the respondent acknolwledged in a reply that he did not have access to the internet during his sentence, while justifying this restriction with a probation order issued by the judge, under which he was prohibited from having access to the internet for three years following his incarceration. The applicant also claims that his statement is sufficient because it is not a traditional liability claim, but a claim based on the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
.
[11]
The respondent essentially claims that the applicant's appeal is without merit because his statement is devoid of any factual basis.
The applicant is challenging Mr. Morneau on several issues, in particular for not scheduling a hearing to allow him to present his arguments orally.
[13]
As I stated in T-1935-12, I feel that this criticism is without merit. Under rule 369(4) of the Rules, when the respondent to a motion requests a hearing, it is the Court that decides whether the motion can be determined based on written arguments or whether a hearing should be scheduled.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  DLR (4th) 274, the Court of Appeal addressed the Court's discretion to determine whether a hearing is relevant when a respondent to a motion submitted pursuant to Rule 369 requests a hearing:
12 I do not agree. Rule 369 imposes no express limits on the exercise of the Court's discretion to dispose of a motion under Rule 369 in writing or after an oral hearing. Neither the text of the Rule nor the jurisprudence supports the position that motions to dismiss an appeal may not be determined on the basis of written submissions. Rather, the Court exercises its discretion by asking whether, in all the circumstances of the given case, it can fairly dispose of the motion without the delay and additional expense of an oral hearing.
13 The questions in dispute on this motion are purely legal and, in my opinion, not unduly complex. None of the factors listed by Prothonotary Hargrave in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 10, as warranting an oral hearing is present here.
[14]
In this case, it was absolutely appropriate for Mr. Morneau to make a decision on the motion to strike based on the parties' written arguments. Additionally, and as I noted in docket T-1935-12, the applicant had the opportunity to present oral arguments during the hearing of his motion to appeal Mr. Morneau's order.
[15]
As for the substantive issue, I had to consider the relevant criteria for deciding a motion to strike a pleading and action in
<FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (available on CanLII), and I refer to paragraphs 17 and 18 of the judgment rendered in docket T-1935-12 for the statement of the applicable principles.
[16]
In this case, I feel that the action brought by the applicant has no hope of success and I support Mr. Morneau's findings. The statement is simply void of any factual basis. It is insufficient for the applicant to claim he had limited computer access and that he was deprived of Internet access during his incarceration and claim it was "a major violation of a constitutional right (section 2 of the Charter)". The applicant does not provide any indication of why having limited computer access and being deprived of Internet access consitutes a violation of his fundamental rights.
[17]
Even if the applicant claims his action is based on the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
he must, in his statement, present the relevant facts in support of his allegations. This requirement is clearly established at Rule 174 of the Rules, which requires a pleading to include a concise summary of the material facts. The statement is far from meeting this requirement.
[18]
Moreover, the very short statement the applicant submitted contains far to few facts to allow the Court to manage the case and allow the respondent to prepare her defence (
Considering the circumstances, I do not see how the applicant could correct the deficiencies in his statement with an amendment. I share Mr. Morneau's opinion that the applicant should not be permitted to amend his statement.
[20]
For all these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
THE COURT ORDERS that
the motion to appeal from the order rendered by prothonotary Morneau on December 21, 2012, is dismissed with costs to the respondent.
.........................
[End of document]