Currently being edited for F.T.R. - judgment temporarily in rough form.
Temp. Cite: [2015] F.T.R. TBEd. OC.031
The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (applicant) v. Venera Demurova (respondent)
(T-140-15; 2015 FC 872)
Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Demurova
Federal Court
July 16, 2015.
Summary:
A Citizenship Judge granted Canadian citizenship to Demurova, a Russian citizen who became a permanent resident in 2008. In applying the physical presence test found in Re Pourghasemi, the Citizenship Judge found that Demurova was physically present in Canada for 1,093 days, and that a shortfall of two days of the minimal requirement of 1,095 days of physical presence was not significant. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration applied for judicial review, submitting that the Citizenship Judge erred in the application of the strict physical presence test to determine whether the residency requirement under s. 5(1)(c) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act was met.
The Federal Court granted the application. "A Citizenship Judge is not entitled to simply waive the requirement of physical presence, as this would run contrary to the purpose of the Act ... . Moreover, this Court has found that a Citizenship Judge's 'blending' of the citizenship test constitutes an error of law". Further, allowing the Citizenship Judge's reasoning to stand would render s. 5(4) of the Act redundant.
Naturalization - Qualifications - Residence - See paragraphs 1 to 27.
Yaël Levy, for the applicant.
Solicitors of Record:
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant.
This application for judicial review was heard at Montreal, Quebec, on July 15, 2015, before Shore, J., of the Federal Court, who delivered the following judgment and reasons, dated July 16, 2015.
..................................................
: A Citizenship Judge is not entitled to simply waive the requirement of physical presence, as this would run contrary to the purpose of the
Citizenship Act
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). Moreover, this Court has found that a Citizenship Judge's "blending" of the citizenship test constitutes an error of law (
Background
[2]
The Minister challenges a decision dated December 31, 2014, rendered by a Citizenship Judge, granting Canadian citizenship to the Respondent, pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
The Respondent is a citizen of Russia who became a permanent resident of Canada on March 17, 2008.
[4]
The Respondent filed an application for citizenship on July 25, 2011. The relevant time period for the purposes of determining the Respondent's residency in accordance with paragraph 5(1)(
) of the Act runs from July 25, 2007 to July 25, 2011.
[5]
On February 25, 2013, the Respondent attended an interview with a citizenship officer. The officer prepared a File Preparation and Analysis Template [FPAT] and placed it on file for consideration by the Citizenship Judge.
[6]
On December 29, 2014, the Respondent appeared before the Citizenship Judge.
Impugned Decision
[7]
In the impugned decision, the Citizenship Judge considers the concerns raised by the citizenship officer in the FPAT, which include the observation of a two-day shortfall from the required minimal 1,095 days of presence in Canada, an undeclared re-entry stamp to Canada dated April 10, 2009, an undeclared entry/exit stamp from Turkey, and other credibility concerns relating to the Respondent's residence and employment history.
[8]
First, the Citizenship Judge finds that a shortfall of two days of the minimal requirement of 1,095 days of physical presence in Canada is not significant.
[9]
Second, the Citizenship Judge is satisfied that apart from the undeclared seven day trip to Cuba in 2009, the Respondent's passport entries support her declarations.
[10]
Third, the Citizenship Judge finds that the Respondent's trip to Turkey is inconsequential to her number of days of presence in Canada because it occurred during the Respondent's declared 61-day trip to Russia. The Citizenship Judge also notes that this ambiguity was clarified by the Respondent in her Residence Questionnaire, at question 7.
[11]
Fourth, the Citizenship Judge is satisfied that the Respondent's explanations for her absences during the relevant period are credible and supported by the evidence.
[12]
The Citizenship Judge ultimately finds that:
[T]he Applicant told her story in a forthright manner and was able to clearly explain the concerns raised by the agent in the FPAT. She did not give me any reasons to doubt her declarations. Furthermore, I gave particular weight to her travel documents which, along with the [Integrated Customs and Enforcement System] report, confirm her oral testimony. And, I note that she presented Notices of Assessment from Revenue Canada (except for 2010 when she was away as declared) and these also corroborate her oral and written statements.
(Impugned decision, Certified Tribunal Record, at p 14)
[13]
Finally, the Citizenship Judge concludes that the Respondent meets the physical presence test enunciated in
Pourghasemi (Re)
Pourghasemi
].
IV. Legislative Provision
[14]
Subsection 5(1) of the Act outlines the requirements applicants must fulfill in order to acquire Canadian citizenship:
Grant of citizenship
5. (1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who
(
) makes application for citizenship;
(
) is eighteen years of age or over;
(
) is a permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, has, subject to the regulations, no unfulfilled conditions under that Act relating to his or her status as a permanent resident and has, since becoming a permanent resident,
(i) been physically present in Canada for at least 1,460 days during the six years immediately before the date of his or her application,
(ii) been physically present in Canada for at least 183 days during each of four calendar years that are fully or partially within the six years immediately before the date of his or her application, and
(iii) met any applicable requirement under the Income Tax Act to file a return of income in respect of four taxation years that are fully or partially within the six years immediately before the date of his or her application;
...
(
) if under 65 years of age at the date of his or her application, has an adequate knowledge of one of the official languages of Canada;
(
) if under 65 years of age at the date of his or her application, demonstrates in one of the official languages of Canada that he or she has an adequate knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship; and
(
) is not under a removal order and is not the subject of a declaration by the Governor in Council made pursuant to section 20.
The Respondent submits the following issues to the Court:
a) Did the Citizenship Judge err in the application of the strict physical presence test to determine whether the residency requirement under paragraph 5(1)(
) of the Act was met?
b) Did the Citizenship Judge fail to adequately assess the evidence resulting in unreasonable finding of fact?
Standard of Review
[16]
A Citizenship Judge's findings in respect of whether the residency requirements for the purposes of paragraph 5(1)(
) of the Act are met are questions of mixed fact and law that are reviewable on the standard of reasonableness (
As such, the highly discretionary nature of the Citizenship Judge's decision attracts considerable deference from this Court (
) of the Act provides that citizenship applicants bear the onus of demonstrating that they have accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada - or 1,095 days - during the relevant four-year period.
[19]
This Court's jurisprudence has recognized that Citizenship Judges are entitled to choose from among the three accepted citizenship tests (
The Court may not intervene unless the chosen citizenship test was applied in an unreasonable manner (
The physical presence test provided in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, is more restrictive than the qualitative residency tests elaborated in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, as it requires a quantitative assessment of the number of days the Respondent has physically spent in Canada (
In the case at hand, in applying the physical presence test found in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, the Citizenship Judge found that the Respondent was physically present in Canada for 1,093 days (Impugned Decision, Certified Tribunal Record, at pp 13 and 15).
[23]
This is an unreasonable outcome which warrants the Court's intervention.
[24]
A Citizenship Judge is not entitled to simply waive the requirement of physical presence, as this would run contrary to the purpose of the Act (
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED). Moreover, this Court has found that a Citizenship Judge's "blending" of the citizenship test constitutes an error of law (
Justice Donald J. Rennie's reasoning in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, sheds light on Parliament's intent in legislating the residency requirements found in paragraph 5(1)(
) of the Act:
Furthermore, as pointed out by Justice Peter B. Annis in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED allowing the Citizenship Judge's reasoning to stand would render subsection 5(4) of the Act redundant:
Conclusion
[27]
For the reasons above, the Minister's application for judicial review is allowed.
[28]
The Court observes that the Respondent may re-apply for citizenship if she so wishes.
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application for judicial review is granted. There is no serious question of general importance to be certified.
Application granted.
Editor: E. Joanne Oley
[End of document]