[1]
"The defendant submits that the obligation of the plaintiff to provide insurance for its barge represents either a waiver of its right to recover in a case of negligence on the part of the defendant or an undertaking to obtain insurance in favour of the defendant for its negligence. This would clearly constitute an exception to the general rule of liability for negligence. In my view, such a conclusion cannot be reached in this case as it is by no means clear that it was the intention of the contracting parties. Furthermore, it cannot be illustrated that no other reading of the contract is possible."
[19]
"It is further argued that the undertaking by Larocque contained in the contract of sale to insure the works under construction against loss constituted a renunciation of any claim for such loss against the builder.
"This argument must fail. The argument arises from an analysis of cases where leases required tenant to pay insurance premiums, either directly or as a part of the rental price, for insurance secured by the owner.
"In some such circumstances it has been held that landlord and tenant are co-assureds, and thus no subrogation in the rights of one such assured could avail against a co-assured equally entitled to indemnity.
"In the present case the contract of sale provided:
"Daniel Larocque is identified as being the 'propriétaire'. It nowhere appears that any of the required insurance would be extended automatically to the builder so as to render it a co-assured in the sense of the cases cited, where the owner of a building secured insurance for himself at the cost of his tenants. In the present case Larocque insured himself, for his own interests, and paid all premiums required himself, as a cost separate from the cost of the construction set out in the sale contract." [sic]
[20]
"Although it has been established that in matters dealing with maritime law, the common law applies [...] the question of subrogation is not, in my view a matter of maritime law nor, therefore, part of the common law.
"The question of subrogation, in this case, is only incidental to and not part of maritime law and thus remains within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Province of Quebec.
"Thus, Plaintiffs have the right to pursue the present claim in their own name for the maximum amount that they have paid to their insured."
[22]
Halsbury's Laws of England
"The master is personally responsible to his owners for any injury or loss to the ship or cargo by reason of his negligence or misconduct, or for acting without authority."
"The rules of good seamanship extend over the whole range of conditions in the working of a vessel from the time of launching and getting under way until she returns to her anchorage in port or moorings in a dock. There are special rules of good seamanship for the manoeuvring of sailing ships or other vessels, and for cases of fog and heavy weather, and for navigation in rivers and other inland waters. The question of what is good seamanship is one of fact to be decided on a consideration of all the relevant circumstances."
"It is no excuse for a master that he could not prevent the accident when it occurred, if he neglected to use measures of precaution which would have rendered the accident less probable."
"The ship must be seaworthy at the beginning of the contract voyage; that is to say, she must be reasonably fit to encounter the ordinary peril that might be expected on the voyage. [...] [I]t is a question of fact, having regard to all the circumstances, whether the ship, when she sailed, was to encounter the ordinary perils reasonably to be expected on the voyage."
"The burden of proving unseaworthiness rests upon the shipper. The fact that the ship becomes leaky or goes to the bottom shortly after putting to sea, without there being any storm or other external factor to account for her condition or loss, is
evidence of unseaworthiness, and shifts to the shipowner the burden of proving that she was in fact seaworthy at the time of her departure." (Ibid. à la page 414, par. 604)
[...]
"It is the master's duty [...] [to] maintain the ship in a seaworthy condition throughout the voyage, and if she becomes unseaworthy he must execute any repairs which may be necessary, provided that he has a reasonable opportunity of doing so without unreasonable delay [...] Thus where the actual safety of the ship, and consequently of the cargo, is endangered, it is the master's duty, if possible, to save the ship by removing the cause of danger, for example by stopping up a leak, or keeping down the water in the holds by pumping, or be returning to the port of loading, or proceeding to a port of refuge for the purpose of executing the necessary repairs. [...] When once she has reached a port of refuge, whatever may be the cause of her unseaworthiness, she must not proceed to sea again in an unseaworthy condition, otherwise the shipowner is responsible, whether the original case of her unseaworthiness is covered by an exception or not, since the master, in leaving the port of refuge without repairing, is guilty of negligence." (Ibid. à la page 417-418, par. 609)
Conclusion
[98]
Notes