Phelan, J.
: This case involves an appeal by an unsuccessful candidate, Bruce Levy ("Levy"), for a position as an EX-01 in the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade ("DFAIT"). There are two issues raised:
(1) Whether the competition was conducted in accordance with the merit principle; and
(2) What documents an unsuccessful candidate can obtain to support his challenge to the competition process.
Facts
[2]
In September 2001, DFAIT conducted a closed competition for appointment to Foreign Service Offices positions at the EX-01 group and level.
[3]
The candidates were screened by the Selection Board in a two-phase process consisting of:
(a) A management simulation exercise (the "In-Basket Exercise"); and
(b) A review of the candidates' three most recent Foreign Service Appraisal Reports ("FSARs").
[4]
Following completion of the first two phases of the competition, there was a top-down selection of the top 50 candidates, which was later increased to 65 candidates. It is this aspect of the competition process to which Levy objects. Levy had passed the first two phases but was screened out of the third phase. He ranked 100th.
[5]
The remaining 65 candidates went through psychological assessment, interviews and reference checks. The Selection Board found 32 candidates qualified and 27 names were placed on the eligibility list in order of merit.
[6]
Aspects of this first eligibility list are the subject of a separate judicial review which will be heard shortly. However, a subsequent eligibility list was issued adding Alain Hausser. It is this eligibility list which was appealed and is the subject of this judicial review.
[7]
As part of his appeal process commenced pursuant to s. 21 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-32, s. 1 ("
") wherein Levy challenges the selection process, Levy requested the following documents:
"1. The list of candidates receiving a 'passing' mark of 117 or higher in the first phase (In-Basket) of the competition.
"2. The name and marks of candidates who received 600 points or higher in the second phase (Screening Board appraisal review) of the competition.
"3. The names and in-basket scores of the (65) candidates selected for the third phase (PSA assessment/DFAIT interviews) of the competition.
"4. The list of 28 individuals promoted in order of their scores in the third phase.
"5. The individual hand-written notes and individual score sheets from the Screening Board for nine candidates, as per their finishing order in the second phase: Candidates finishing 14th, 22nd, 50th, 51st, 65th, 78th, 82nd, 93rd.
"6. All memoranda, briefing notes, email and other documents that explain how and when the number of promotions was decided.
"7. All memoranda, briefing notes, emails and other documents that explain how, why and when the decision was taken to refer about 50 candidates to the third phase of the competition, and further, all such material to explain how that number was subsequently changed to 65."
[8]
The Appeal Board's decision of March 18, 2003 dismissed Levy's appeal. There are three aspects of the decision which are critical to this judicial review:
1. The Board held that the information requested did not conform to the provisions of s. 26 of the
Public Service Employment Regulations 2000
, SOR/2000-80 (the "
Regulations
").
2. The departmental representative was unable to explain the basis for the determination on the limitation of candidates.
3. The competition process did not offend the merit principle because the terms thereof were communicated to candidates and that the Department had the right to impose limits and reserve flexibility to expand the number.
The cornerstone of selection to, from or within the Public Service is the merit principle enshrined in s. 10(1) of the
"10(1) Appointments to or from within the Public Service shall be based on selection according to merit, as determined by the Commission, and shall be made by the Commission, at the request of the deputy head concerned, by competition or by such other process of personnel selection designed to establish the merit of candidates as the Commission considers is in the best interests of the Public Service."
The operation of the selection process is described, in part, in ss. 16(1) and 17(1) of the
"16(1) The Commission shall examine and consider all applications received within the time prescribed by it for the receipt of applications and, after considering such further material and conducting such examinations, tests, interviews and investigations as it considers necessary or desirable, shall select the candidates who are qualified for the position or positions in relation to which the competition is conducted.
"17(1) From among the qualified candidates in a competition the Commission shall select and place the highest ranking candidates on one or more lists, to be known as eligibility lists, as the Commission considers necessary to provide for the filling of a vacancy or anticipated vacancies."
The basic appeal rights for a closed competition are set out in s. 21(1) of the
"21(1) Where a person is appointed or is about to be appointed under this Act and the selection of the person for appointment was made by closed competition, every unsuccessful candidate may, within the period provided for by the regulations of the Commission, appeal against the appointment to a board established by the Commission to conduct an inquiry at which the person appealing and the deputy head concerned, or their representatives, shall be given an opportunity to be heard."
Germane to the issue of disclosure of documents is s. 26 of the
Regulations
:
"26(1) An appellant shall be provided access, on request, to any information, or any document that contains information, that pertains to the appellant or to the successful candidate and that may be presented before the appeal board.
"(2) The deputy head concerned shall provide the appellant, on request, with a copy of any document referred to in subsection (1).
"(3) Despite subsections (1) and (2), the deputy head concerned or the Commission, as appropriate, may refuse to allow access to information or a document, or to provide a copy of a document, if the disclosure might
(a) threaten national security or any person's safety;
(b) prejudice the continued use of a standardized test that is owned by the deputy head's department or the Commission or that is commercially available; or
(c) affect the results of such a standardized test by giving an unfair advantage to any individual.
"(4) If the deputy head concerned or the Commission refuses to allow access to information or a document under subsection (3), the appellant may request that the appeal board order such access.
"(5) If the appeal board orders access to information or a document under subsection (4), that access is subject, before and during the hearing, to any conditions that the appeal board considers necessary to prevent the situations described in paragraphs (3)(a) to (c) from occurring.
"(6) Any information or document obtained under this section shall be used only for purposes of the appeal."
While this judicial review raises two issues, it can be determined on the basis of the Appeal Board's decision denying Levy the documents which he requested.
[14]
The parties agreed in their respective legal memoranda that the standard of review in this case is correctness. The Respondent made oral argument that, depending upon the question being examined by the Court, the standard of review should be reasonableness.
[15]
The Respondent is correct that the standard of review does, to some extent depend on the question being considered, however, in this case the issues as I see them are purely legal. Therefore, the conclusion in
<FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), is applicable - the standard of review is correctness.
[16]
Levy's appeal was a challenge to the legality by which the selection process was established, the choice of the top-down selection method. Levy put directly in issue the method of assessing the relative merit of candidates and the basis for choosing a numerical cut-off of candidates.
[17]
The obligation to establish that the competition was conducted in accordance with the merit principle rests with the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 93 F.T.R. 158 (T.D.)).
[18]
While there is some explanation of the rationale for a numerical cut-off found in the Panorama document describing the competition, the most telling non-explanation is found in the evidence of the Department at paragraph 42 of the Appeal Board decision:
"The department explained that it was entitled to determine the number of candidates that would proceed to the assessment phase of the selection process. The department's representative, Mr. Chartrand explained that this was not a decision into which he had input. Possibly the number was increased based on the anticipated number of vacancies, but he could not speculate with certainty. Nevertheless, he maintained that this was a decision the department was entitled to make."
[19]
It would appear from the Appeal Board's decision that the Department might not be able to meet its obligation to establish that it had complied with the merit principle. In the context of Levy's appeal, the Department's witness did not justify the process and the Appeal Board would not provide Levy with access to documents which are relevant to his appeal.
[20]
Section 26 of the
Regulations
describes the documents to which an appellant is entitled as those "that pertain to the appellant or to the successful candidate".
[21]
The word "pertains" can, in the proper context and consistent with the purpose of the provision, be given a wide meaning. Since the purpose of s. 26 is to afford an appellant disclosure in the appeal process, it is consistent with the purpose of the provision to view "pertains" as equivalent to "relevant" or otherwise having a nexus with the appellant or the successful candidate (see
The right of appeal and the right to make a meaningful challenge to the selection process requires that s. 26 of the
Regulations
be given a wide interpretation.
[23]
The Appeal Board interpreted s. 26 in a narrow manner focussing on the documents as a class of documents rather than directing their mind to the relevance of the documents or to the purposes of this
Regulation
.
[24]
In addition to the interpretation of s. 26, the request for documents must be considered in the context of general public law principles of fairness and natural justice.
[25]
Justice Kelen of this Court in
I cannot see how the appeal would measure up to these principles where an appellant was denied access to documents which are potentially highly relevant to the grounds of his appeal.
[27]
Section 26 of the
Regulations
cannot be viewed as a complete code which operates to deny an appellant access to relevant documents. It is at best a minimum standard of disclosure.
[28]
On this issue alone, the Appeal Board's decision should be quashed and the matter referred to a differently constituted appeal board which should order the production of the documents requested.
[29]
Since the issue of whether the competition was conducted in accordance with the merit principle will be examined again and against a more fulsome record, I will make no finding on this issue. The new appeal board will no doubt give careful consideration to s. 16(1) of the
and the words, "... shall select the candidates who are qualified for the position ...".
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. The application for judicial review is allowed and the matter is referred back to another panel of the Public Service Commission Appeal Board for a new hearing with directions to order access to the documents requested by the Applicant.
2. The Applicant is entitled to his costs.
Application allowed.
[End of document]